4
ASSESSING PLS-SEM
RESULTS PART I
Evaluation of Reflective Measurement
Models
CASE STUDY ILLUSTRATION—EVALUATION
OF REFLECTIVE MEASUREMENT MODELS
Running the PLS-SEM Algorithm
We continue working with our PLS-SEM example on corporate reputa-
tion. In Chapter 3, we explained how to estimate the PLS path model and
how to obtain the results by opening the default report in the SmartPLS 4
software (Ringle, Wende, & Becker, 2022). Recall that to do so, you must
first load the simple corporate reputation model and then run the model by
clicking on the wheel symbol with the label Calculate in the toolbar or by us-
ing the pull-down menu by going to Calculate → PLS-SEM algorithm.A f t e r
running the PLS -SEM algorithm, if you had previously ticked Open report on
the dialog box, the SmartPLS results report automatically opens; if not, click
on the Open Report button in the Modeling window. You can save the results
of this report by clicking on the Save button in the toolbar.
Before analyzing the results, you need to quickly check if the algorithm
converged (i.e., the stop criterion of the algorithm was reached and not the
maximum number of iterations). T o do so, go to Algorithm → Stop criterion
changes in the results report. You will then see the table shown in Exhibit
A4.1, which shows the number of iterat ions of the PLS-SEM algorithm. This
number should be lower than the maxi mum number of iterations (i.e.,
3,000). At the bottom left side of the table, you will see that the algorithm
converged after Iteration 5. If the PLS-SEM algorithm does not converge in
fewer than 3,000 iterations (the default setting in the software), the algorithm
could not find a stable solution. This kind of situation almost never occurs.
But if it does occur, there are problems with the data and they need to be
checked carefully. For example, data problems may occur if the sample size is
too small or if an indicator has many identical values (i.e., the same data
points, which results in insufficient variability).
Exhibit A4.1 ■ Stop Criterion Table in SmartPLS
When your PLS path model estimation converges, which it practically al-
ways does, you need to examine the following PLS-SEM calculation results
tables from the results report for ref lective measurement model assessment:
Outer loadings , Composite reliability (rho_a) , Composite reliability (rho_c) ,
Cronbach’s alpha, Average variance extracted (A VE),a n d Discriminant validity.
We examine other elements of the report in Chapters 5 and 6, when we ex-
tend the simple path model by including formative measures and also consid-
er the structural model results.
Reflective Measurement Model Evaluation
The simple corporate reputation model has three latent variables with re-
flective measurement models (i.e., COMP , CUSL,and LIKE)a sw e l la sas i n -
gle-item construct ( CUSA). For the reflective measurement models, we need
the estimates for the relationships betwe en the reflective constructs and their
indicators (i.e., outer loa dings). Exhibit A4.2 displa ys the results table for the
outer loadings, which can be found under Final results → Outer loadings.B y
default, the outer loadings are also displayed in the Graphical output of the
PLS results report after running the PLS-SEM algorithm. All outer loadings
o ft h er e f l e c t i v ec o n s t r u c t sCOMP , CUSL, and LIKE are well above the
threshold value of 0.708, which suggests suf ficient levels of indicator reliability.
A Primer on Partial Least Squares Stru ctural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM)2
Exhibit A4.2 ■ Outer Loadings
The indicator comp_2 (outer loading: 0.798) has the smallest indicator reli-
ability with a value of 0.637 (0.798 2), while the indicator cusl_2 (outer load-
ing: 0.917) has the highest indicator reliability, with a value of 0.841 (0.917 2).
Next, go to Quality criteria → Construct reliability and validity to evaluate
the construct measures’ internal consist ency reliability and convergent validi-
ty. Here, you have the option of displaying the composite reliability values us-
ing a bar chart or in a matrix format. Exhibit A4.3 shows the internal consis-
tency reliability values in matrix format. With
ρA values of 0.832 ( COMP),
0.839 ( CUSL), and 0.836 ( LIKE), all three reflective constructs have high
levels of internal consistency reliability. Clicking on Composite reliability
(rho_a)—Bar chart shows the bar chart of the constructs’ reliability values
(Exhibit A4.4). If a ρA value is above the threshold value, the corresponding
bar is colored green. If a ρA is lower than 0.70, the bar is colored red. As indi-
cated above, all ρA values exceed the threshold. Note that the ρA value of the
single-item variable CUSA is 1.00, but this cannot be interpreted as evidence
the construct measurement is perfectly reliable and should not be reported
with other measures of reliability.
Exhibit A4.3 ■ Construct Reliability and Validity
Chapter 4 ■ Assessing PLS-SEM Results Part I 3
Exhibit A4.4 ■ Reliability ρ A
Analogous to ρA, you can also examine the bar charts of Cronbach’s alpha
and composite reliability ρC. All bars in the charts appear in green, indicating
that all construct measures are above the 0.70 threshold. The specific values
of Cronbach’ s alpha (0.776 forCOMP,0 . 8 3 1f o rCUSL, and 0.831 for LIKE)
and the composite reliability
ρC (0.865 for COMP, 0.899 for CUSL,a n d
0.899 for LIKE) can be accessed by going to Quality criteria → Construct reli-
ability and validity → Overview.A g a i n ,a sCUSA is measured using a single
item, interpreting this construct’s Cron bach’s alpha or composite reliability
values is not meaningful.
Convergent validity assessment is b ased on the A VE values, which can be
accessed by navigating to Quality criteria → Construct reliability and validity
in the Results report . As with the internal consistency reliability measures,
SmartPLS offers the option of displaying the results using bar charts (Exhibit
A4.5) or in a matrix format. In this example, the A VE values of COMP
(0.681), CUSL (0.748), and LIKE (0.747) are well above the required mini-
A Primer on Partial Least Squares Stru ctural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM)4
Exhibit A4.5 ■ Average Variance Extracted (AVE)
mum level of 0.50. Thus, the measures of the three reflective constructs have
high levels of convergent validity.
Finally, in the Quality criteria → Discriminant validity, SmartPLS offers sev-
eral approaches to assess whether the co nstruct measures empirically demon-
strate discriminant validity. The primar y criterion for discriminant validity as-
sessment is the Heterotrait-monotrait ratio (HTMT) , which can be accessed via
the Quality criteria → Discriminant validity → Heterotrait-monotrait ratio
(HTMT)—Matrix section of the results report. Exhibit A4.6 shows the HTMT
values for all pairs of constructs in a matrix format. Note that SmartPLS com-
putes the HTMT values on the grounds of absolute correlations to avoid ad-
verse results due to a combination of positive and negative indicator correlations
(Ringle, Sarstedt, Sinkovics, & Sinkovics, 2023). The Results report also shows
these HTMT values in a list format and in bar charts, using 0.85 as the relevant
threshold level. As can be seen, all HTMT values are clearly lower than the
more conservative threshold value of 0.85, even for COMP and LIKE as well as
CUSA and CUSL, which are very similar from a conceptual viewpoint. Recall
that the threshold value for conceptually similar constructs is 0.90.
Chapter 4 ■ Assessing PLS-SEM Results Part I 5
According to the Fornell-Larcker c riterion, the square root of the A VE of
each construct should be higher than the construct’s highest correlation with
any other construct in the model (this notion is identical to comparing the
A VE with the squared correlations bet ween the constructs). Exhibit A4.7
shows the results of the Fornell-Larcker criterion assessment with the square
root of the reflective constructs’ A VE on the diagonal and the correlations be-
tween the constructs in the off-diagonal position. For example, the reflective
construct COMP has a value of 0.825 for the square root of its A VE, which
needs to be compared with all correlation values in the column of COMP .
Note that for CUSL, you need to consider the correlations in both the row
and column and for LIKE only those in the row. Overall, the square roots of
t h eA V E sf o rt h er e f l e c t i v ec o n s t r u c t sCOMP (0.825), CUSL (0.865), and
LIKE (0.864) are all higher than the correlations of these constructs with oth-
er latent variables in the path model, thus indicating all constructs are valid
measures of unique concepts.
Note that while frequently used in past applied research, the Fornell-Lar-
cker criterion does not reliably detect di scriminant validity issues. That is, the
criterion is not well-suited for disclosi ng existing discriminant validity prob-
lems. Nevertheless, any violation of th e Fornell-Larcker criterion should be
taken as strong evidence for a severe discriminant validity problem.
In addition to examining the HTMT ratios, you should test whether
the HTMT values are significantly different from the threshold value.
Exhibit A4.6 ■ HTMT
Exhibit A4.7 ■ Fornell-Larcker Criterion
A Primer on Partial Least Squares Stru ctural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM)6
Specifically, we assume a 0.85 threshold for all pairs of constructs except for
COMP and LIKE as well as CUSA and CUSL, for which we assume a higher
threshold (0.90) because of their conce ptual similarity. T o run this test, we
need to compute bootstrap confidence intervals using bootstrapping. T o run
the bootstrapping procedure, go back to the Modeling window by clicking on
Edit in the Results window. Next, left-click on Calculate → Bootstrapping in
the pull-down menu. In the dialog box t hat opens, choose the bootstrapping
options as displayed in Exhibit A4.8 (Chapter 5 includes a more detailed in-
troduction to the bootstrapping procedure and the parameter settings). Make
sure to select 10,000 Subsamples and the Complete (slower) option, which in-
cludes the results for HTMT (unlike the Most important (faster) option). Se-
lect Percentile bootstrap as the Confidence interval method , One tailed as Te s t
type,a n da0 . 0 5 Significance level (note that you can also select Tw o t a i l e das
Te s t t y p eand a 0.10 Significance level ). Note that Fixed seed next to Random
number generator should be selected to facilitate the reproducibility of results.
F i n a l l y ,m a k es u r et oc h e c kt h eb o xn e x tOpen report and click on Start calcu-
lation.
Exhibit A4.8 ■ Bootstrapping Options in SmartPLS
Chapter 4 ■ Assessing PLS-SEM Results Part I 7
After running bootstrapping, the resul ts report opens automatically. Go to
Quality criteria → Heterotrait-monotrait ratio (HTMT) and navigate to Confi-
dence intervals bias corrected . The table that opens (Exhibit A4.9) shows the
original HTMT values (column Original sample (O)) for each combination of
constructs in the model, along with the average HTMT values computed
from the 10,000 bootstrap samples, as shown in column Sample mean (M) .
Note that you should have the same results, provided that you selected the
Fixed seed option in the bootstrapping settings. However, if you chose Ran-
dom seed , your results will differ from thos e presented here and will change
slightly each time you rerun the bootstrapping procedure. The reason is that
bootstrapping builds on randomly draw n bootstrap samples, which will differ
every time the procedure is run. The diffe rences in the overall bootstrapping
results are marginal, however, provide d that a sufficiently large number of
bootstrap samples have been drawn (e.g., 10,000). By selecting the Fixed seed
option, the bootstrapping algorithm’s random number generator uses fixed
settings, which facilitates reproducing the results in later model estimations.
Exhibit A4.9 ■ Percentile Confidence Intervals (with Bias Correction)
for HTMT
The columns labeled 5% and 95% show the lower and upper bounds of
the 95% one-sided bootstrap confide nce interval (or the 90% two-sided
bootstrap confidence interval, respectively). The statistical test focuses on the
right tail of the bootstrap distribution to show that HTMT value is signifi-
cantly lower than the corresponding th reshold values (0.85 and 0.90) with a
5% probability of error. As can be seen all values in the 95% column are low-
er than these threshold values, suggesting that all HTMT values are signifi-
cantly lower than 0.85 and 0.90, respectively. More importantly, even assum-
ing a more conservative threshold of 0.8 5 for all construct combinations (i.e.,
including CUSA and CUSL as well as COMP and LIKE), we find that all
HTMT values are significantly lower tha n this value (i.e., the confidence in-
tervals’ upper bound is smaller than 0.85). For example, the lower and upper
bounds of the HTMT’s 95% confidence interval for CUSA and COMP are
A Primer on Partial Least Squares Stru ctural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM)8
Exhibit 4.10 ■ Results Summary for Reflective Measurement Models
Latent
Variable Indicators
Convergent Validity Internal Consistency Reliability
Discriminant
Validity
Loadings
Indicator
Reliability AVE
Cronbach’s
Alpha Reliability
ρA
Composite
Reliability
ρ C HTMT
>0.70 >0.50 >0.50 0.60–0.90 0.60–0.90 0.60–0.90
Significantly
lower than
0.85 (0.90)?
COMP
comp_1 0.858 0.736 0.681 0.776 0.832 0.865 Yes
comp_2 0.798 0.637
comp_3 0.818 0.669
CUSL
cusl_1 0.833 0.694 0.748 0.831 0.839 0.899 Yes
cusl_2 0.917 0.841
cusl_3 0.843 0.711
LIKE
like_1 0.879 0.773 0.747 0.831 0.836 0.899 Yes
like_2 0.870 0.757
like_3 0.843 0.711
Chapter 4 ■ Assessing PLS-SEM Results Part I 9
0.369 and 0.556, respectively. Since the upper bound of 0.556 is lower than
0.85, the HTMT value of 0.465 for CUSA and COMP is significantly lower
t h a nt h em o r ec o n s e r v a t i v et h r e s h o l dvalue of 0.85. T o summarize, the boot-
strap confidence interval results of th e HTMT criterion also clearly demon-
strate the discriminant validity of the constructs.
Exhibit A4.10 summarizes the results o f the reflective measurement model
assessment. As can be seen, all model evaluation criteria have been met, pro-
viding support for the measures’ reliability and validity.
A Primer on Partial Least Squares Stru ctural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM)10